Instructor: Let's use
what we've learned
about list concatenation
and list slicing,
along with makeBeat()
with lists,
to create a rhythm
that is constantly changing
as it repeats.
This script is going
to vary the rhythm
every four measures
by taking a list of drum sounds
and taking whatever sound
is at the end of the list
and moving it to the beginning
so that when we use
our beatString,
these numbers will start
referring to different sounds
and lists every fourth measure.
Let's look at this
in some more detail.
First let's look at how
the makeBeat() function here
is working.
We're placing—
we're inside of a "for" loop
that's going measure by measure
through a song.
And this makeBeat() function
is placing one measure
of a rhythm
onto track 1 of the DAW.
We've used as the first argument
not a single sound,
but this list of sounds here
so that in our beatString
all of these numbers
refer to indices of the list.
So the five here refers
to place 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
this last element.
And if we went to say
the one at the end here,
that would refer
to the 01 sound,
this sound here.
Now, in our for
loop, we're not just calling
makeBeat() every measure,
but we're also calling
this if-statement every time
we go through each measure,
saying
"if(measure % 4 = 0,"
and if that is true,
then we do some other things
to rotate the sounds list.
So let's look
at the expression here,
the Boolean expression
"measure mod four equals zero."
The mod is taking the remainder
of a division operation.
So when measure is 1,
we're looking at "1 % 4."
Well "1 % 4" is 1,
because it doesn't
divide evenly.
One doesn't divide evenly
into four,
so we're left
with a remainder of 1.
That's not equal to 0.
Next time we go through,
we get "2 % 4,"
but 2 doesn't divide evenly
into 4 either,
so we get 2 as a remainder.
"3 % 4."
Three doesn't divide evenly
into four either,
so we have three
as a remainder.
"4 % 4."
But 4 does divide
evenly into 4,
there's no remainder.
So that equals 0.
So this condition
is going to be true,
and that's the first time
we'll execute the contents
of the if-statement block.
And then "5 % 4"
would have a remainder
of 1 again, and so on.
When we get to "8 % 4,"
well 8 divided by 4
divides evenly,
so we get a remainder of zero.
And that would be
the next time it would be true,
and then again at 12,
then 16, then 20,
and so on and so forth.
So every four measures,
this block of code
inside of the if-statement
will execute.
Now let's look at what's
actually happening
inside of here.
First thing is we're defining
a variable called listLength.
It would be the length
of the drumSounds list,
which has one, two, three,
four, five, six sounds in it.
So listLength is always 6.
Now, we're defining
a new list called lastSound,
which equals drumSounds
of this length minus 1,
that's 6 minus 1, so 5,
to listLength, that's 6.
So we're going 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
We're just taking
this very last element.
In this case it is "OS_SNARE01."
The next statement here
is defining a new list
called allButLastSound,
and that is drumSounds of 0
all the way up
to listLength minus 1,
which is 6 minus 1, or 5.
So that's 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4
get included in that list.
So in other words,
that's everything in the list
except for the last sound.
So now, we reassign drumSounds
to be a new list,
which is
concatenating lastSound,
that's this one,
and all the other sounds.
So what we've done here
is we've taken "OS_SNARE01,"
which was the last element
in the list,
and we've moved it
to the first element in the list
through list slicing
and list concatenation.
So now, the next time
we use this beatString,
all the elements in this list
will be in different slots.
So we'll get the same rhythm,
but it will be realized
with different sounds,
because the five will now
be pointing to a different sound
than it was before.
All the numbers will be pointing
to different sounds
than they were before.
And so that continues happening
as we rotate these sounds
through the list
every four measures
until we get to the end.
So every four measures,
we get a variation
on the drumBeat.
This notion of repeating
and varying throughout music
realized through these various
computational techniques.
[upbeat electronic music]